**Program Name:** Diploma in Engineering

---

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI01016021
Course / Subject Name : Introduction to I.T. Systems

**Academic Year:** 2024-2025

Semester:                           1st

Category of the Course:             ESC

Prerequisite:       Basic knowledge of Computer, demonstrated through the school’s Test Learning
Center.
Rationale:         Information technology is a relatively new comprehensive term that describes the
entire range of information generation, storage, transmission, retrieval, and
processing. Most organizations in the industry, business, non-profit
organizations, and government departments now rely heavily on their
information systems (IS) and information technology (IT). The information
system collects, stores, and disseminates information from the organization's
environment and internal operations to support organizational functions and
decision-making, communication, coordination, control, analysis and
visualization. Therefore, the knowledge about the various applications areas of
Information Technology including practical skills acquired through the
laboratory will help students when he/she will be working with information
systems.
At the end of the course, students will be able to comfortably work on computers,
install and configure OS, connect it to external devices, protect information and
computers from basic abuses/attacks. This course is therefore so designed that
the students will be able to apply the concepts of IT systems as and when
required.

Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
No                                   Course Outcomes                                     RBT Level
Apply the basic concepts of Information technology systems for various                   A
educational, business, and industrial applications.
- 2   Discuss basic logic gates for designing digital logic circuits.                          U
- 3   Describe features of different Operating Systems for various applications.               R
Analyze    different    parameters      of the computer       network-        its        N
communication cable/devices, topology, and addressing system.
Appraise information security for data protection and cyber-attacks in network             N
communication.
- Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)

w.e.f. 2024-25                                http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                 Page 1 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI01016021
Course / Subject Name : Introduction to I.T. Systems
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
 Teaching and Examination Scheme:
                           Total
  Teaching Scheme
                          Credits                Assessment Pattern and Marks
     (in Hours)                                                                                  Total
                        L+T+ (PR/2)
                                                 Theory              Tutorial / Practical        Marks
- T       PR          C
- SE (E)     PA/CA (M)       PA/CA (I)    ESE (V)
- 0       2           3             70            30             20            30         150

 Course Content:
Unit                                                                             No. of         % of
No.                                                                              Hours        Weightage
       Basics of Information System
       1.1 Importance of information technology in the modern era.
- Information Concepts
- Information v/s knowledge
- Components Of Information System
 1.    1.2 Hardware Components of computer system                                  4              10
```

- Memory (Primary and secondary)
- Motherboard
- Peripherals (Names and application)
1.3 Applications of various Internet Digital Platforms
- - BHIM, Digi-Locker, Digital Gujarat
Digital Logic
2.1 Introduction to digital computers and number system
- Binary numbers
- Base conversions (Binary, Decimal, Hexadecimal, Octal)
2. 4              10
2.2 Working of Logic gates
- AND, OR, INVERTER, XOR, XNOR
2.3 Working of Universal Gates
- NAND and NOR Gate

w.e.f. 2024-25                             http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                      Page 2 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI01016021
Course / Subject Name : Introduction to I.T. Systems

Operating System
3.1 General features of OS
- Introduction
- Need, Functions, Services
3.2 Types of OS (Introduction and Classification)
3. - Batch, Multitasking/Time-Sharing, Multiprocessing, Real-Time,    5         20
Distributed, Network, Mobile
3.3 Proprietary & Open-source software
- Windows OS -Introduction Only
- Linux OS-Architecture, Components of Linux System, Kernel
Mode vs User Mode, Basic Features

Information Communication & Networking
4.1 Basic terminology of information communication
- Basic Structure of communication system
- Transmission modes (Simplex, half-duplex, Full-duplex)
- Synchronous and Asynchronous transmission
- Serial and Parallel communication
4.2 Transmission media and Connectors
- Twisted -pair (STP-UTP), Coaxial, Fiber Optic,
- RJ-45 connectors
4.4 OSI Model
4. - Working & Functioning of each layer                              7         25
- Name of Protocols & Hardware supported at each layer
4.5 Network Topologies
- Bus, Mesh, Star, Ring, Hybrid
4.6 Types of Computer Networks
- LAN, MAN, WAN
4.7 Internet & Intranet
- URL, Internet, Intranet, - Comparison between Intranet &
4.8 Networking Devices (Types & use)
- Switch, Router, Repeater, Wireless Access Point

w.e.f. 2024-25                           http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/             Page 3 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI01016021
Course / Subject Name : Introduction to I.T. Systems

- P Addressing Scheme & DNS
5.1 Network Addressing (IPv4) & Frame Format (IPv4)
- Internet Protocol (need, types)
- Classful addressing scheme, Address space, notations, netid,
hostid
5. - Need of IPv6                                                            5           15
- IPv6 Notations & examples
5.3 Comparison between IPv4 & IPv6
5.4 DNS
- Introduction, Need
- Domain Names & its types
Information Security
6.1 Need for Information Security
- Definition of various terms of Information Security like
Cryptography, Vulnerability, Threat, Attack, Encryption,
Decryption
6.2 The Principles of Security (CIA Triad)
6.                                                                                   5           20
6.3 Cyber attacks
- Introduction of common types of attacks
- Malware, Virus, Worm, Trojan Horse, Denial-of-service,
Phishing, Password cracking
6.4 Cyber Law
- IT Amendment Act 2008 (Section 66 & 67-Introduction Only)
- 0          100

Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
                                  Distribution of Theory Marks (in %)
- | R Level | U Level | A Level | N Level | E Level | C Level |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
- 0             30           10           40                 0                 0
 Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create
 (as per Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)

 References/Suggested Learning Resources:
 (a) Books:
Sr             Title of Book              Author               Publication, year and ISBN
No.
```

1. Digital Design (4th          M. Morris Mano;           Pearson publication, Latest Edition,
Edition)                     Michael D. Ciletti        ISBN: 81-203-0417-9

w.e.f. 2024-25                                http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                 Page 4 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI01016021
Course / Subject Name : Introduction to I.T. Systems

2. Operating systems            Dhamdhere                    Tata McGraw Hill,
- SBN: 1282187244, 9781282187245
3. Operating systems            Silberschatz,                Wiley & Sons publication
Galvin, Gagne                ISBN: 978-0-470-12872-5
4. Data Communications          Behrouz                      Tata McGraw Hill
and Networking              Forouzan                     ISBN: 978-0-07-296775-3
5. Cryptography and            William Stallings            Prentice Hall
network security                                         ISBN: 978-0130914293

(b) Open-source software and website:

Open-source software:
1. https://fedoraproject.org/
2. https://www.libreoffice.org/discover/libreoffice/

Website:
1. https://www.digitalindiaportal.co.in/
2. https://getintopc.com/
3. https://nptel.ac.in/
4. https://www.cert-in.org.in/
5. https://www.netacad.com

Suggested Course Practical List:

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
Sr.                            Practical Outcomes (PrOs)                                Unit        Approx.
No                                                                                      No.          Hrs.
           Identify specifications of various types of computer systems                   1            02
           available in your institute.
           Demonstrate participation in any three Digital India Platforms                 1            02
 2         from the following to survey Digital literacy.
- Digital India Platforms: BHIM/Dig-Locker/Digital Gujarat
          Convert given decimal number into another                                       2            02
 3
- HEXADECIMAL, OCTAL, DECIMAL, BINARY)
          Install anyone from the given freeware application software/tool                3            02
 4
          on your PC (Adobe PDF, notepad++, VLC media player)
          Update the Operating System by using the recommended Setting from the           3            02
- Control Panel.

     w.e.f. 2024-25                                  http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                 Page 5 of 7
```

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI01016021
Course / Subject Name : Introduction to I.T. Systems

Identify different aspects of the network in your department lab                  4           04
by following Parameter’s consideration.
6       (1) Types of Cables (Twisted -pair, Coaxial, Fiber Optics) (2)
Topology (Bus, Mesh, Star, Ring, Hybrid)
- 3) Network Type (LAN, MAN, WAN)
Demonstrate following Networking Commands for                                     4           02
7       troubleshooting.
Commands: ping, traceroute, hostname, netstat, nslookup, route
Install any three peripheral devices from the following in your                   4           04
Desktop/Laptop.
- List of Peripheral Devices:
- Computer Mouse (Wired/Wireless), -Microphone, -Digital Camera, -
Scanner, -Printer, -USB Flash Drive

Identify specifications of the various network connecting devices at your         4           02
- Institute’s Lab.
Identify your Desktop/Laptop IP Address (IPv4 & IPv6) by the following.           5           04
- 0      (1) Ipconfig command
- 2) Default/Manual Network & Internet setting
Compile various cyber incidents by visiting the site https://cert-                5           02
in.org.in/.5
Prepare a document by using various digital platforms,                            6           02
- 2      newspapers or any social media platform to identify cyber-crimes that
have been done in your city.
Total Hrs.               30

List of Laboratory/Learning Resources Required:

Sr.                                                                                      Practical
No                               Learning Resources Specifications                         No.

- Computer System (Desktop/Laptop) with minimum configuration:                     All
Operating System: Windows 7 or later version, Linux
- Red Hat, Fedora, Ubuntu)
- AM:8 GB,
- DD: As per preferable,
- S-Office :2016 or Open Office

w.e.f. 2024-25                               http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                    Page 6 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI01016021
Course / Subject Name : Introduction to I.T. Systems

Suggested Project List: Suggestive list of projects is given here. This has to match the competency
and the COs. Similar projects could be added by the concerned course teacher:
- Digital India Platform: Demonstrate the various Digital India initiatives to create
awareness about Digital literacy.
- Operating System: Install any flavor of the Linux Operating System by using the
virtualization Software (VMware/virtual box).
- Networking: Prepare a report of various Network connecting devices existing at your home/
Institute Lab.
- Information Security: Prepare a case study of various cyber-attacks in the current
marketplace.

Suggested Activities for Students:
- Prepare a portfolio for the Digital India platform and identify digital services for Indian citizens.
- Give a seminar on the latest technologies & applications in demand.
- Identify the existing network structure of your home.
- Prepare a case-study on cyber-crime.

*******

w.e.f. 2024-25                                http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                     Page 7 of 7
