**Program Name:** Diploma in Engineering

---

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000141
Course / Subject Name : Integrated Personality Development Course

**Academic Year:** 2024-25
Semester:                         2nd
Category of the Course:           HSMC

Prerequisite:     -
Rationale:      IPDC aims to prepare students for the modern challenges they face in their daily
lives. Promoting fortitude in the face of failures, unity amongst family discord, self-
discipline amidst distractions, and many more priceless lessons. The course focuses
on morality and character development at the core of student growth, to enable
students to become self-aware, sincere, and successful in their many roles - as an
ambitious student, reliable employee, caring family member, and considerate
citizen.

Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
No                                  Course Outcomes                                        RBT Level

To provide students with a holistic value-based education that will enable
- 1   them to be successful in their academic, professional, and social lives.

To give the students the tools to develop effective habits, promote personal
- 2   growth, and improve their wellbeing, stability, and productivity.

To allow students to establish a stronger connection with their family                     U
- 3   through critical thinking and devolvement of qualities such as unity,
forgiveness, empathy, and effective communication.

To provide students with soft skills that complement their hard skills, making
- 4   them more marketable when entering the workforce.

To enhance awareness of India’s glory and global values, and to create
- 5   considerate citizens who strive for the betterment of their family, college,
workforce, and nation.

w.e.f. 2024-25                               http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                   Page 1 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000141
Course / Subject Name : Integrated Personality Development Course
To inspire students to strive for a higher sense of character by learning from           U/A/C
role models who have lived principled, disciplined, and value-based lives.
- Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
                               Total
      Teaching Scheme         Credits
                                                       Assessment Pattern and Marks
         (in Hours)           L+T+
- PR/2)                                                             Total
                                                       Theory           Tutorial / Practical
- T         PR           C          ESE    PA / CA
- A/CA (I)      ESE (V)
- E)      (M)
- 0         2           3           70       30             20           30         150

Course Content:
Unit                                                                                                 No. of
           Module & Subject                                 Content
No.                                                                                                  Hours
                              Students will learn about the need for values as part of their
                              holistic development to become successful in their many roles -
       The Need for Values                                                                                2
                              as ambitious students, reliable employees, caring family
```

members, and considerate citizens.
Module:Remaking        Students learn how self-improvement enables them to secure a
Yourself               bright future for themselves. They will learn 6 powerful thought-
1.                                                                                                       2
Subject :Restructuring processes that can develop their physical, intellectual, emotional,
Yourself               and spiritual quotients.
Students will undergo a study of how habits work, the habits of
2. Yourself               successful professionals, and the practical techniques that can be          2
Subject:Power       of used to develop good habits in their life.
Module: Learning
Students will learn from the inspirational lives of India's two
from Legends
3. legends, Sachin Tendulkar and Ratan Tata. They will implement               2
Subject : Tendulkar & these lessons through relatable case studies.
Module: From House
Active listening is an essential part of academic progress and
to Home
4. communications. Students will learn to listen with their eyes,              2
Subject : Listening & ears, mind, and heart.
Understanding

w.e.f. 2024-25                               http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                   Page 2 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000141
Course / Subject Name : Integrated Personality Development Course
Module: Facing           This lecture enables students to revisit the way in which they
Failures                 approach challenges. Through the study of successful figures
5.                                                                                                      2
Subject : Welcoming      such as Disney, Lincoln and Bachchan, students will learn to face
Challenges               difficulties through a positive perspective.
Failure is a student’s daily source of fear, negativity, and
6. depression. Students will be given the constructive skills to            2
Subject : Significance
understand failure as formative learning experiences.
of Failures
India’s ancient Rishis, scholars, and intellectuals have made
Module: My India         tremendous contributions to the world, they developed an
My Pride                 advanced, sophisticated culture and civilization which began
7.                                                                                                      2
Subject : Glorious       thousands of years ago. Students will learn the importance of
Past - Part 1            studying India’s glorious past so that they could develop a strong
passion and pride for our nation.
Module: My India         Our ancient concepts can be used to seek revolutionary ideas and
My Pride                 to generate inspiration. Students will develop a deeper interest in
8.                                                                                                      2
Subject : Glorious       India’s Glorious Past – by appreciating the need to read about it,
Past - Part 2            research it, write about it, and share it.
Module: Learning         Dr Kalam’s inspirational life displayed legendary qualities which
from Legends             apply to students (1) Dare to Dream (2) Work Hard (3) Get Good
9.                                                                                                      2
Subject : A.P.J. Abdul   Guidance (4) Humility (5) Use Your Talents for the Benefit of
Kalam           Others
Module: Soft Skills
Students are taught the means of building a professional network
- 0. Subject : Networking                                                                              2
and developing a leadership attitude.
- Leadership
Module: Soft Skills      Students will learn the secrets of project management through the
- 1. Subject : Project        Akshardham case study. They will then practice these skills              2
Management               through an activity relevant to student life.
Module:Remaking
Yourself                 Students will learn how social media can become addictive and
- 2.                                                                                                     2
Subject : Handling       they will imbibe simple methods to take back control.
Module: Facing
Failures                 Students will learn about the power and necessity of faith in our
- 3.                                                                                                     2
Subject : Power of       daily lives.
Module: From House      Students will understand the importance of strong family
- 4. relationships. They will learn how to overcome the generation            2
to Home
gap and connect with their family more.
w.e.f. 2024-25                              http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                    Page 3 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000141
Course / Subject Name : Integrated Personality Development Course
Subject : Bonding the
Family
Module: Selfless         Students will learn that performing seva is beneficial to one’s
- 5. Service                  health, wellbeing, and happiness. It also benefits and inspires       2
Subject : Seva           others.
Total                                     30

- OURSE MATERIAL / MAIN COURSE WORKBOOK:
Workbook will be designed and presented by IPDC Team. These official workbooks would be the
course- material for study of IPDC. These workbooks will solve the purpose of study, submission,
viva and exams for students.
- PDC Workbook-1 (published by Swaminarayan Aksharpith)

- PDC REFERENCES:
These are the reference material for the IPDC lectures. This is not compulsory reading for the
students as the essential information is contained in the workbook.
Module                                               References
1. Thomas Edison’s factory burns down, New York Times Archives, Page 1, 10/12/1914
2. Lincoln Financial Foundation, Abraham Lincoln's "Failures": Critiques,
Forgotten Books, 2017
3. J.K. Rowling Harvard Commencement Speech | Harvard University Commencement,
- 008
Facing      4. Born Again on the Mountain: A Story of Losing Everything and Finding It
- Failures       Back, Arunima Sinha, Penguin, 2014
5. Failing Forward: Turning Mistakes Into Stepping Stones for Success, John C.
Maxwell, Thomas Nelson, 2007
6. Steve Jobs: The Exclusive Biography Paperback, Walter Isaacson, Abacus, 2015
7. Failing Forward: Turning Mistakes Into Stepping Stones for Success, John C.

w.e.f. 2024-25                               http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                  Page 4 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000141
Course / Subject Name : Integrated Personality Development Course

1. Chase Your Dreams: My Autobiography, Sachin Tendulkar, Hachette India, 2017
2. Playing It My Way: My Autobiography, Sachin Tendulkar, Hodder & Stoughton, 2014
3. The Wit and Wisdom of Ratan Tata, Ratan Tata, Hay House, 2018
Learning
2      from      4. The Tata Group: From Torchbearers to Trailblazers, Shashank Shah, Penguin
Legends        Portfolio, 2018
5. The Leader Who Had No Title, Robin Sharma, Jaico Publishing House, 2010
6. In the Joy of Others: A Life-Sketch of Pramukh Swami Maharaj, Mohanlal
Patel and BAPS Sadhus, Swaminarayan Aksharpith, 2013
1. Rishis, Mystics, and Heroes of India, Sadhu Mukundcharandas, Swaminarayan
Aksharpith, 2011
2. Physics in Ancient India, Narayan Dongre, Shankar Nene, National Book Trust, 2016
My India
- My         3. The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan, Raymond Allchin,
Pride          Bridget Allchin, Cambridge University Press, 1982
4. The Āryabhaṭīya of Āryabhaṭa: An Ancient Indian Work on Mathematics and
Astronomy (1930), Walter Eugene Clark, University of Chicago Press, reprint,
Kessinger Publishing, 2006
1. Power of Habit, Charles Duhigg, Random House Trade Paperbacks, 2014
2. Change Your Habit, Change Your Life, Tom Corley, North Loop Books, 2016
3. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen Covey, Simon & Schuster, 2013
Remaking
- 4. Seven Habits of Highly Effective Teens, Sean Covey, Simon & Schuster, 2012
Yourself
5. Atomic Habits, James Clear, Random House, 2018
6. How a handful of tech companies control billions of minds every day, Tristan Harris,
- ED Talk, 2017
1. “What Makes a Good Life? Lessons from the Longest Study on Happiness”, R.
From           Waldinger, Ted Talks, 2015
- House to
Home        2. Long Walk To Freedom, Nelson Mandela, Back Bay Books, 1995
3. Outliers, Malcolm Gladwell, Back Bay Books, 2011
1. The 17 Indisputable Laws of Teamwork, John Maxwell, HarperCollins, 2013
2. Team of Teams: New Rules of Engagement for a Complex World, Stanley
- Soft Skills    McChrystal, Portfolio, 2015
3. Predictably Irrational, Revised and Expanded Edition: The Hidden Forces That Shape
Our Decisions, Dan Ariely, Harper Perennial, 2010

w.e.f. 2024-25                            http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                 Page 5 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000141
Course / Subject Name : Integrated Personality Development Course

1. Open: An Autobiography, Andre Agassi, Vintage, 10 August 2010
2. The Physiological Power of Altruism [online], James Hamblin, The Atlantic,
December                                30,                              2015,
Selfless       https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/12/altruism-for-a-better-
7                       body/422280/ [last accessed June 10, 2020]
Service
3. TBI Blogs: From Entrepreneurs to Doorkeepers, Everybody Serves with Love &
Warmth at This Ahmedabad Café [online], The People Place Project, The Better
India, May 29, 2017, https://www.thebetterindia.com/102551/small-way-serve-
ahmedabad-seva-cafe/, [last accessed June 10, 2020]

*******

w.e.f. 2024-25                            http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                Page 6 of 6
