**Program Name:** Engineering

---

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics and Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code : DI03011021
Course / Subject Name: Applied Electronics

**Academic Year:** 2024-25
Semester:                            3rd
Category of the Course:              PCC

Prerequisite:         -
Rationale:            -

Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
No                                      Course Outcomes                                           RBT Level
- 1     Design and test different types of circuits using operational amplifier IC 741.        R,U,A
- 2     Choose relevant thyrister for the given application.                                   R,U,A
- 3     Design triggering and protection circuits for thyristors                               R,U,A
- 4     Design power converter circuits.                                                       R,U,A
- 5 Use thyristors in different application                                                   R,U,A
- Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
- Teaching Scheme       Total Credits
                                                         Assessment Pattern and Marks
         (in Hours)         L+T+ (PR/2)
                                                          Theory          Tutorial / Practical
- T         PR              C         ESE
- A(M)          PA(I)       ESE (V)
                                                      (E)
- 0         2              3          70       30            20             30        150

Course Content:
Unit                                                                                 No. of  % of
No.                                                                                  Hours Weightage
           Operational Amplifiers (Op Amps):
- Basic block diagram and working of an operational amplifier. Describe
```

1. IC 741 as an Op-Amp. Pin configuration of IC 741.Op-Amp: open loop            7            20
and closed loop. Parameters of operational amplifier like, Input and
output offset voltage, Input offset current, Input bias current, CMRR,

w.e.f. 2024-25                                  http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                        Page 1 of 4
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics and Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code : DI03011021
Course / Subject Name: Applied Electronics
slew rate. The ideal Op.Amp. Equivalent circuit of Op.Amp.
Applications of operational amplifiers like Inverting and non-inverting
amplifier, Summing amplifier, Comparator, Differentiator, Integrator,
Schmitt trigger.
Introduction to Thyristors:
Construction, Symbol, working, characteristic and applications of
electronics devices like SCR, DIAC, TRIAC, GTO, IGBT, and MCT.
2. Working of SCR using two transistor analogy. Construction and                  6        20
working of Opto-Isolators, Opto-TRIAC, Opto- SCR(LASCR), and
Opto-transistor. List advantages, applications of Opto- Isolators. Solid
state relay using Opto-Isolators.
Turn on and Turn off methods of Thyristor:
Triggering (Turn on) methods of SCR. Commutation(Turn off)
3.                                                                                    3        10
techniques of SCR. Thyristor protection: Over current protection, Over
voltage protection, Snubber circuit, Gate protection.
Power Converters:
Compare Single phase rectifiers and poly phase rectifiers. Describe the
applications of Poly- phase rectifiers. Single phase control rectifier using
- CR. Poly phase rectifiers. Three-phase H.W. & three-phase F.W.
4.                                                                                    7        25
rectifiers. Inverters: Series, Parallel and bridge Inverters. Principle &
working of Chopper circuits. Describe the applications of Chopper.
Single phase cyclo converters. Describe the working of UPS & SMPS
with the help of block diagram. List the applications of UPS & SMPS.
Industrial Electronics Applications:
Static switch using SCR. Static circuit breaker using SCR. Single phase
- C power control using diac-triac. DC power control circuit using SCR
with UJT in triggering circuit. Photo electric relay/switch using LDR,
5.                                                                                    7        25
- ASCR, photo diode. Solar Photovoltaic (PV) based power generation.
- F Heating: Induction heating, Dielectric heating. Stepper motor –
construction, working and its applications. Programmable Logic Control
– block diagram, working, advantages, applications.
Total                                       30      100

Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
                             Distribution of Theory Marks (in %)
- | R Level | U Level | A Level | N Level | E Level | C Level |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
- 5               30                45                -                  -              -

w.e.f. 2024-25                                http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                     Page 2 of 4
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
                                       Program Name: Engineering
                                              Level: Diploma
                            Branch: Electronics and Communication Engineering
                                    Course / Subject Code : DI03011021
                                Course / Subject Name: Applied Electronics
Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create (as per
Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)

References/Suggested Learning Resources:
(a) Books:
```

1. Op-Amp and linear integrated circuits Ramakant A. Gayakwad, PHI.
2. Thyristor Engineering M.S. Berde, Khanna publishers.
3. Power electronics devices circuits and application M.H. Rashid, Pearson Education
4. Power electronics M.D.Singh, K.B.Khanchandani, Mc Graw Hill.
5. Applied electronics, R.S.Sedha, S.Chand

(b) Open source software and website:
1. https://nptel.ac.in
2. https://www.tutorialpoint.com
3. Virtual lab

Suggested Course Practical List: If any
1. Build / test inverting amplifier using Op-Amp and observe input, output waveforms on CRO.
2. Build non-inverting amplifier using Op-Amp and observe input, output waveforms on CRO.
3. Build / test Integrator circuit using IC 741 and observe output, input waveforms on CRO for
different values of R and C.
4. Build / test diferentiator circuit using IC 741 and observe output, input waveforms on CRO for
5. Build / test Op-Amp as a summing amplifier.
6. Plot Characteristics of SCR
7. Plot Characteristics of diac
8. Plot V/I Characteristics of triac
9. Perform RC phase shift control of UJT triggered SCR.
- 0. Perform the operation of commutation on SCR.
- 1. Test the operation of Inverter(Series,parallel,Bridge).
- 2. Perform the AC power control using DIAC and TRIAC(Fan regulator).
- 3. Test Light operated Relay/Photo-electric switch.
- 4. Build and test mini project.

w.e.f. 2024-25                             http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                      Page 3 of 4
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics and Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code : DI03011021
Course / Subject Name: Applied Electronics
List of Laboratory/Learning Resources Required:
Suggested Project List:
- Different application od Op.Amp IC 741like                   Inverting   amplifier,noninverting
amplifier,comparater etc.
- Fan regulator using TRIAC/DIAC
- Light operated Relay-/Street Light Control.
- Water Level Controller.
- Home Appliances Automation.
- Automatic Door control and counting of persons.
- Solid State Relay using Diac-Triac
- SCR Firing using UJT.
- Arm ROBOT using Stepper Motor.
- SMPS based on IC7840
- Battery charger using SCR

Suggested Activities for Students: If any
Find Specifications and package of SCR, DIAC, TRIAC, IGBT, MCT, Opto-TRIAC, Opto-SCR, Opto-
Transistor from datasheet.
Collect specification of commercially used UPS, Inverter, and SMPS, Stepper motor.

*******

w.e.f. 2024-25                              http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                  Page 4 of 4
