## GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY (GTU)

## Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2021 (COGC-2021) Semester-V

## Course Title: Entrepreneurship & Start-ups

(Course Code: 4300021)

| Diploma programmer in which this course is offered | Semester in which offered |
| -------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| All Branches of Diploma Engineering                | 5 th  Semester            |

## 1. RATIONALE

Entrepreneurs have significant impact on our country's current developing  economy. The social expectations towards engineering professionals are certainly emerging as job creators especially with the thrust given to 'Make in India' and 'Vocal for Local' campaigns. Startup India  is  a  well-known  flagship  initiative  of  the  Government  of  India,  intended  to  catalyze startup culture and build a strong and inclusive ecosystem for innovation and entrepreneurship. The last 6 years have witnessed tremendous growth of start-ups i.e. from 733  in  2016-17  to  14000  in  2021-22.    This  course  focuses  on  the  basic  roles,  skills  and functions of entrepreneurship with special attention to startup. The course is directed to help students to enhance capabilities in the field of managing the given task as well as to understand peripheral influencing aspects for starting a new business. It will certainly help students to think in a direction to establish a small industry /start-up and develop /validate it using fundamental know how.

## 2. COMPETENCY

The  purpose  of  this  course  is  to  help  the  student  to  attain  the  following  industry  identified competency through various teaching learning experiences:

### 2.1 Establish a small enterprise/start-up, validate it and make it scalable

## 3. COURSE OUTCOMES (COs)

The practical exercises, the underpinning knowledge and the relevant soft skills associated with the identified competency are to be developed in the student for the achievement of the following COs:

Upon completion of the course, the student will be able to demonstrate knowledge of the following topics:

1. Understanding the dynamic role of entrepreneurship and Startups by Acquiring Entrepreneurial spirit and resourcefulness, quality, competency, and motivation
2. Identify a Business Idea and implement it
3. Select suitable Management practices like leadership and Ownership, resource institutes
4. Overview of Support Agencies and Incubators
5. Building Project Proposal & knowing CSR, Ethics, Ex-Im, & Exit strategies

## 4. TEACHING AND EXAMINATION SCHEME

| Teaching Scheme (In Hours) | Teaching Scheme (In Hours) | Teaching Scheme (In Hours) | Total Credits | Theory Marks | Theory Marks | Practical Marks | Practical Marks | Total Marks |
| -------------------------- | -------------------------- | -------------------------- | ------------- | ------------ | ------------ | --------------- | --------------- | ----------- |
| L                          | T                          | P                          | C             | CA           | ESE          | CA              | ESE             |             |
| 3                          | 0                          | 0                          | 3             | 30*          | 70           | 0               | 0               | 100         |

(*):  Out  of  30  marks  under  the  theory  CA,  10  marks  are  for  assessment  of  the  micro-project  to facilitate  integration  of  COs  and  the  remaining  20  marks  is  the  average  of  2  tests  to  be  taken during the semester for the assessing the attainment of the cognitive domain UOs required for the attainment of the COs .

Legends:  L -Lecture; T -  Tutorial/Teacher  Guided  Theory  Practice; P -  Practical; C -  Credit, CA -Continuous Assessment; ESE - End Semester Examination.

## 5. SUGGESTED SOFT PRACTICAL EXERCISES (During Theory)

The  entrepreneurial  or  start-up  journey  begins  by  readying  for  your  future  dream  from  college projects and pursuing the same beyond college hours also. It is encouraged to go through COs and identify traits and search for various state and national agencies for your entrepreneurship / startup journey and convert the same into successful product in market.

The following practical outcomes (SPrOs) are the sub-components of the Course Outcomes (COs). Some  of  the SPrOs marked '*' are  compulsory,  as  they  are  crucial  for  that  particular  CO  at  the 'Precision Level' of Dave's Taxonomy related to 'Psychomotor Domain'.

## Note

i. Though the course does not contain any Practical work, a few Practical Exercises can be designed and offered by the respective course teacher to develop the industry relevant skills/outcomes to match the COs. The below table is only a suggestive list.

ii. The following are some sample 'Process' and 'Product' related skills (more may be added/deleted depending on the course) that occur in the above listed Practical Exercises of this course required which are embedded in the COs and ultimately the competency.

| Sr. No. | Sample Performance Indicators for the PrOs                   | Weightage in % |
| ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| 1       | Entrepreneur Traits and Behavior Modelling                   | 30             |
| 2       | Various  State  and  Central  Entrepreneurship  Promotional Schemes and Start-up Policies | 30             |
| 3       | Business Model for a Startup and study of Unicorns           | 40             |
| Total   | Total                                                        | 100            |

## 6. AFFECTIVE DOMAIN OUTCOMES

The  following sample Affective  Domain  Outcomes  (ADOs)  are  embedded  in  many  of  the  abovementioned  COs  and  PrOs.  More  could  be  added  to  fulfill  the  development  of  this  course competency.

a. Work as a leader/a team member (while doing a micro-project).

b. Model behavioral practices of an entrepreneur while planning for an enterprise

c. Practice ethics and consider methods/processes that reduce waste and/or possibly conserve environment in designing a new business till it's commercialization.

The ADOs are best developed through the laboratory/field-based exercises. Moreover, the level of achievement of the ADOs according to Krathwohl's 'Affective Domain Taxonomy' should gradually increase as planned below:

i. 'Valuing Level' in 1st year - Planning

ii. 'Organization Level' in 2nd year - Model Development

iii. 'Characterization Level' in 3rd year - Make it Scalable

## 7. UNDERPINNING THEORY

The major underpinning theory is given below based on the higher level UOs of Revised Bloom's taxonomy that are formulated for development of the COs and competency. If required, more such UOs could be included by the course teacher to focus on attainment of COs and competency.

| Unit                                                         | Major Learning Outcomes (in cognitive domain)                | Topics and Sub-topics                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 1) Introduction to Entrepreneurship and Start-Ups            | 1a) Define Entrepreneurship<br>1b) Discuss characteristics and functions of entrepreneurship<br>1c) Identify different types of Entrepreneurships<br>1d) Compare the concepts entrepreneur and intrapreneur and find out the motivation behind it<br>1e) Distinguish between entrepreneur and managers<br>1f) Identify 7-M Resources<br>1g) Know MSME & Startup India, Standup India, SSIP and its registration process for both | 1. Definition, Traits of an entrepreneur<br>2. Functions of Entrepreneurship - Job Creation, Innovation, Inspiration, Economic Development<br>3. Types of Entrepreneurship<br>4. Motivation for Intrapreneurship<br>5. Types of Business Structures<br>6. Similarities and differences between entrepreneurs and managers<br>7. 7-M Resources<br>8. Micro, Small, Medium Enterprise/MSME - Industry Registration Process<br>9. Startup India, Standup India and SSIP Gujarat & Startup registration process |
| 2) Business Ideas and their implementation (Idea to Start-up) | 2a) Finding Ideas and making an activity map<br>2b) Develop the plans for creating and starting the business<br>2c) To identify business using the ideation canvas and the business model canvas<br>2d) To know market research related terms<br>2e) To know market mix related terms<br>2f) Learn Product related terminologies<br>2g) Emphasize on Innovation<br>2h) Explain concept of Risk and SWOT | 1. Discovering ideas and visualizing the business with Activity map<br>1.1 Idea Generation<br>1.2 Product Identification<br>2. Business Plan - The Marketing Plan and Financial Plan/Sources of Capital<br>3. Business opportunity identification and evaluation<br>4. Market research<br>4.1.1. Questionnaire design<br>4.1.2. Sampling<br>4.1.3. Market survey<br>4.1.4. Data analysis & interpretation<br>5. Marketing Mix (4Ps - product, price, promotion, place)<br>5.1.1. Identifying the target market<br>5.1.2. Competition evaluation and Strategy adoption<br>5.1.3. Market Segmentation<br>5.1.4. Marketing, Advertising and Branding<br>5.1.5. Digital Marketing<br>5.1.6. B2B, E-commerce and GeM<br>6. Product Terms - PLC, Mortality Curve and New product Development Steps, Inventory, Supply Chain Management<br>7. Importance and concept of Innovation, Sources and Process<br>8. Risk analysis and mitigation by SWOT Analysis |
| 3) Management Practices                                      | 3a) Explain the concept and differences between industry, commerce and business<br>3b) Describe various types of ownerships in the organization<br>3c) Explain different types of leadership models<br>3d) Analyze the nature and importance of various functions of management<br>3e) Discuss Financial organization Management<br>3f) Distinguish management and administration | 1. Industry, Commerce and Business<br>2. Types of ownership in the organization - Definition, Characteristics, Merits & Demerits<br>3. Different Leadership Models<br>4. Functions of Management - Merits & Demerits<br>4.1 Planning<br>4.2 Company's Organization Structure<br>4.3 Directing<br>4.4 Controlling<br>4.5 Staffing - Recruitment and management of talent<br>5. Financial organization and management<br>6. Differences between Management and Administration |
| 4) Support Agencies and Incubators                           | 4a) Identify support agencies and current promotional schemes for enterprise and startups<br>4b) Advocacy to investor<br>4c) To Explain various Legal Issues | 1. State & National Level Support agencies and Current Promotional Schemes for new Enterprise<br>2. Start-up Incubation and modalities<br>3. Communication of Ideas to potential investors - Investor Pitch<br>4. Legal Issues<br>4.1. Contracts<br>4.2. Copyrights<br>4.3. Insurance<br>4.4. IPR<br>4.5. Licensing<br>4.6. Patents<br>4.7. Trade Secrets<br>4.8. Trademarks |
| 5) Project Proposal & Exit strategies                        | 5a) To work on the development of a project proposal<br>5b) Describe social responsibility and relate with economic Performance<br>5c) Explain managerial ethics<br>5d) To know Ex-Im Policies<br>5e) Identify suitable strategies of succession and harvesting | 1. Project Planning<br>i. Project planning and report<br>ii. Feasibility study<br>iii. Project cost estimation<br>iv. Breakeven point<br>v. Return on investment and Return on sales<br>2. Corporate Social Responsibilities and Economic performance<br>3. Business Ethics<br>4. Ex-Im policies<br>5. Succession and harvesting strategy<br>6. Bankruptcy and avoidance |

## 8. SUGGESTED SPECIFICATION TABLE FOR QUESTIONPAPER DESIGN

| Unit No.  | Unit Title                                                | Teaching Hours | R Level | U Level | A Level | Total Marks |
| --------- | --------------------------------------------------------- | -------------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ----------- |
| I         | Introduction to Entrepreneurship and Start-Ups            | 08             | 4       | 6       | 2       | 12          |
| II        | Business Ideas and their implementation (Idea to Startup) | 08             | 6       | 4       | 4       | 14          |
| III       | Management Practices                                      | 12             | 6       | 8       | 8       | 22          |
| IV        | Support Agencies and Incubators                           | 08             | 4       | 4       | 4       | 12          |
| V         | Project Proposal & Exit strategies                        | 06             | 2       | 4       | 4       | 10          |
| **Total** | **Total**                                                 | **42**         | **22**  | **26**  | **22**  | **70**      |

Legends: R=Remember, U=Understand, A=Apply and above (Revised Bloom's taxonomy)

Note : This specification table provides general guidelines to assist students for their learning and to teachers to teach and question paper designers/setters to formulate test items/questions to assess the attainment of the UOs. The actual distribution of marks at different taxonomy levels (of R, U and A) in the question paper may slightly vary from above table.

## 9. SUGGESTED STUDENT ACTIVITIES

Other  than  the  classroom  learning,  following  are  the  suggested  student-related co-curricular activities  which  can  be  undertaken  to  accelerate  the  attainment  of  the  various  outcomes  in  this course. Students should make a portfolio i.e. perform at least FIVE from following list of activities individually or in group (not more than 2). They should prepare reports of about 2-5 pages for each activity  and  collect/  record  physical  evidence  for  their  portfolio  which  may  be  useful  for  their placement interviews:

i. Develop two products from household waste (attach photographs).

ii. Download product development and innovative films from internet.

iii. Prepare a collage for 'Traits of successful entrepreneurs.' / 'Motivation & Charms of Entrepreneurship'

iv. Invite entrepreneurs, industry officials, bankers for interaction. Interview at least four entrepreneurs or businessman and identify

v. Identify your hobbies and interests and convert them into business idea.

vi. Mock Business Model - Choose a product and design a unique selling preposition, brand name, logo, advertisement (print, radio, and television), jingle, packaging, and labeling for it.

vii. Develop your own website. Share your strengths and weakness on it. Declare your time bound goals and monitor them on the website.

viii. Choose any product/advertisement and analyze its good and bad points/cost sheet/supply chain etc. (individuals should select different ads)

ix. Compare schemes for entrepreneurship promotion of any bank.

x. Visit industrial exhibitions, trade fairs and observe nitty-gritty of business. Get news of Vibrant Gujarat Events. (Upcoming in Jan 2024)

xi. Open a savings account and build your own capital.

xii. Arrange a visit to a Mall, observe products, supply chain management and prepare report.

xiii. Organize industrial visit and suggest modifications for process improvement. Conduct a market survey for a product/project before visit. In the visit collect data on machinery specifications, price, output/hour, power consumption, manpower requirement, wages, raw material requirement, specification, price, competitor's product price, features, dealer commissions, marketing mix etc. Make a detailed report at the end of the visit.

xiv. Select a social cause, set objectives, plan and work for its accomplishment. Find details about some famous NGOs

xv. Present Own Dream Start-up story as Seminar OR Analyze 2 products from Shark Tank program.

## 10. SUGGESTED SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES (if any)

These are sample strategies, which the teacher can use to accelerate the attainment of the various outcomes in this course:

a) Massive open online courses (MOOCs) may be used to teach various topics/subtopics.

b) Guide student(s) in undertaking micro-projects.

c) 'L' in section No. 4 means different types of teaching methods that is to be employed by teachers to develop the outcomes.

d) Show animation/video related to course content.

e) Various Apps related to subject topics/sub-topics

f) Other Common instructions as under:

1) Instructors should emphasize more on exemplary and deductive learning.

2) Students should learn to recognize, create, shape opportunities, and lead teams for providing economic-social value to society.

3) Business simulations should be used to enhance behavioral traits of successful intrapreneurs and entrepreneurs amongst students.

4) Emphasis should be on creating entrepreneurial society rather than only setting up of enterprise.

5) They must be encouraged to surf on net and collect as much information as possible.

6) Each student should complete minimum ten activities from the suggested list. Minimum possible guidance should be given for the suggested activities.

7) Students should be promoted to use creative ideas, pool their own resources, finish their presentation, communication and team skills.

8) Alumni should be frequently invited for experience sharing, guiding and rewarding students.

9) Display must be arranged for models, collages, business plans and other contributions so that they motivate others.

10) You may show video/animation film/presentation slides to demonstrate various management functions, traits of entrepreneur etc.

11) Arrange a visit to nearby venture capital firm.

12) Give 1 Mini project and 1 project report for future business to all the students.

13) The following pedagogical tools will be used to teach this course:
    a) Lectures and Discussions
    b) Role Playing
    c) Assignments and Presentations
    d) Case Analysis
    e) Quiz on Management and Entrepreneurship
    g) Mimic/narrate examples from world's leading businessmen among the students.
    h) Guide students on how to address issues on environment and sustainability

## 12. SUGGESTED MICRO-PROJECTS

Only  one  micro-project is  planned  to  be  undertaken  by  a  student  that  needs  to  be  assigned  to him/her in the beginning of the semester. In the first four semesters, the micro-projects are groupbased (group of 3 to 5). However, in the fifth and sixth semesters ,  the number of students in the group should not exceed three.

The micro-project could be industry application based, internet-based, workshop-based, laboratorybased or field-based. Each micro-project should encompass two or more COs which are in fact, an integration of PrOs, UOs and ADOs. Each student will have to maintain a dated work diary consisting of  individual  contributions  in  the  project  work  and  give  a  seminar  presentation  of  it  before submission.  The  duration  of  the  guidance  for  micro  project  should  be  about 6-8 (six  to  eight) student engagement hours during the theory/ course. The students ought to submit micro-project by the end of the semester to develop the industry-oriented COs.

A suggestive list of micro-projects/ practical exercise is given here. This has to match the competency and the COs. Similar micro-projects could be added by the concerned course teacher: (It  can  be  a  Seminar  with  bound  /hand  written  notes/  ppts  of  individual  students  OR  a  product/

service portfolio)

1) Entrepreneur Traits and Behavior Modelling

2) Various State and Central Entrepreneurship Promotional Schemes and Start-up Policies

3) Business Model for a Startup and study of Unicorns

4) Make your own Product/Service portfolio/Proposal with USP, logo, advertisement (print, radio, and television), jingle, packaging, labeling and branding for it.

## 13. SUGGESTED LEARNING RESOURCES

| Sr. No | Title of Book                                                | Author                                 | Publication with place, year and ISBN          |
| ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| 1      | Entrepreneurship in Action                                   | Coulter                                | PHI 2nd Edition                                |
| 2      | Entrepreneurship Development                                 | E. Gordon & K. Natarajan               | Himalaya                                       |
| 3      | Entrepreneurship                                             | Robert D. Hisrich & Mathew J. Manimala | McGraw Hill Education; ISBN 978-1259001635     |
| 4      | Entrepreneurial Development                                  | S S Khanka                             | S Chand & Company; ISBN: 978-8121918015        |
| 5      | Entrepreneurship Development and Management                  | A. K. Singh                            | Jain Book Agency (JBA) publishes, New Delhi    |
| 6      | Entrepreneurship Development & Management                    | R.K. Singal                            | S K Kataria and Sons; ISBN: 978-8189757007     |
| 7      | Small Scale Industries and Entrepreneurship                  | Vasant Desai                           | Himalaya 2008                                  |
| 8      | Entrepreneurship                                             | Roy Rajeev                             | Oxford University Press; ISBN: 978-0198072638  |
| 9      | Industrial Engineering and Management                        | O.P.Khanna                             | Dhanpat Rai and Sons, Delhi                    |
| 10     | Industrial Organization and Management                       | Tara Chand                             | NemChand and Brothers; Roorkee                 |
| 11     | Industrial Management and Entrepreneurship                   | V. K. Sharma.                          | Scientific Publishers, New Delhi               |
| 12     | Entrepreneurship Development and Small Business Enterprise   | Poornima M Charantimath                | Pearson Education; ISBN: 978-8131759196        |
| 13     | Entrepreneurship Development                                 | S Anil kumar                           | NEW AGE Intern. Pvt Ltd; ISBN: 978-8122414349  |
| 14     | The Startup Owner's Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company | Steve Blank and Bob Dorf               | K & S Ranch ISBN - 978-0984999392              |
| 15     | The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses | Eric Ries                              | Penguin UK ISBN - 978-0670921607               |
| 16     | Demand: Creating What People Love Before They Know They Want It | Adrian J. Slywotzky with Karl Weber    | Headline Book Publishing ISBN - 978-0755388974 |
| 17     | The Innovator's Dilemma: The Revolutionary Book That Will Change the Way You Do Business | Clayton M. Christensen                 | Harvard business ISBN: 978-142219602           |
| 18     | How to write a business plan                                 | Brian Finch                            | 2nd edition, 2007, Kogan Page India Pvt. Ltd.  |
| 19     | HBR - Creating business plan                                 | -                                      | 20-minute manager series, 2014.                |
| 20     | HBR - Creating business plan                                 | -                                      | Expert solution to everyday challenges, 2007.  |

## 14. SOFTWARE/LEARNING WEBSITES

## [A] List of Software/Learning Websites

| Sr. No. | Topic Key Word                             | Link                                                         |
| ------- | ------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 1       | MoCI                                       | [Ministry of Commerce and Industry](https://www.india.gov.in/website-ministry-commerce-and-industry) |
| 2       | MSME                                       | 1) [MSME Ministry](https://msme.gov.in/)<br>2) [MSME Government Schemes](https://www.msmex.in/learn/government-schemes-for-startups-and-msmes-in-india/) |
| 3       | Start-up, Stand-up India & SSIP Gujarat    | 1) [Startup India](https://www.startupindia.gov.in/)<br>2) [Stand Up Mitra](https://www.standupmitra.in)<br>3) [Udyami Mitra - Stand Up India](https://udyamimitra.in/page/standup-india-loans)<br>4) [SSIP Gujarat](https://www.ssipgujarat.in/) |
| 4       | Make in India                              | [Make in India Initiative](https://www.makeinindia.com/)     |
| 5       | Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan Vocal for Local | [Atmanirbhar Bharat Resources](https://indiancc.mygov.in/uploads/2021/08) |
| 6       | Skill India                                | [Skill India Portal](https://skillindia.gov.in)              |
| 7       | MSDE                                       | [Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship](https://www.msde.gov.in/) |
| 8       | Vibrant Gujarat                            | [Vibrant Gujarat Global Summit](https://www.vibrantgujarat.com/) |
| 9       | NABARD                                     | [National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development](https://www.nabard.org) |
| 10      | PAN                                        | [PAN Card Services - NSDL](https://www.onlineservices.nsdl.com/paam/endUserRegisterContact.html) |
| 11      | I-hub                                      | [I-Hub Gujarat](https://ihubgujarat.in)                      |
| 12      | GSTIN                                      | [GST Registration Portal](https://reg.gst.gov.in/registration) |
| 13      | IEC Code                                   | [Directorate General of Foreign Trade](https://www.dgft.gov.in/CP) |
| 14      | Mudra                                      | [Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana](https://www.mudra.org.in/)     |
| 15      | Export-Import                              | [Export Import Resources - IIFT](https://niryatbandhu.iift.ac.in/exim/) |
| 16      | NSIC                                       | [National Small Industries Corporation](https://www.nsic.co.in/) |
| 17      | DIC                                        | [District Industries Centre Gujarat](https://ic.gujarat.gov.in/dic-contact.aspx) |
| 18      | EDI                                        | [Entrepreneurship Development Institute](https://www.ediindia.org/) |
| 19      | CED                                        | [Centre for Entrepreneurship Development Gujarat](https://ced.gujarat.gov.in/home) |
| 20      | NIESBUD                                    | [National Institute for Entrepreneurship & Small Business Development](https://www.niesbud.nic.in/) |
| 21      | Start-up Talky                             | [Government Initiatives for Startups](https://startuptalky.com/list-of-government-initiatives-for-startups/) |
| 22      | Invest India                               | [Startup India Hub - Invest India](https://www.investindia.gov.in/startup-india-hub) |
| 23      | SAAC                                       | [South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation](https://www.saccindia.org/india/startups.html) |
| 24      | Action for India                           | [AFI Activity Accelerator Programs](https://actionforindia.org/afi-activity-accelerator-programs.html) |
| 25      | Indian Chamber of Commerce                 | [Indian Chamber of Commerce](https://www.indianchamber.org/) |
| 26      | FICCI                                      | [Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce](https://www.ficci.in/api/home) |
| 27      | GCCI                                       | [Gujarat Chamber of Commerce & Industry](https://www.gujaratchamber.org/) |

### [B] Films for Self-Study

*(To be seen on Sundays/holidays by students on their own, not to be shown in polytechnics in any case)*

i. Any Body Can Dance (2013)
ii. Corporate (2006)
iii. Do Duni Char (2010)
iv. Guru (2007)
v. Oh My God (2013)
vi. Pirates of Silicon Valley (1999)
vii. The Pursuit of Happiness (2006)
viii. Rocket Singh (2010)
ix. Start-up.com (2001)
x. The Social Network (2010)
xi. Wall Street (1987)
xii. Band Baja Barat (2010)
xiii. You've Got Mail (1998)
xiv. Steve Jobs (2015)
xv. Chef (2014)
xvi. Office Space (1999)
xvii. Erin Brockovich (2000)
xviii. The Founder (2016)

## 15. PO-COMPETENCY-CO MAPPING

| Competency & Course Outcomes                                 | PO 1: Basic & Discipline Specific Knowledge | PO 2: Problem Analysis | PO 3: Design/Development of Solution | PO 4: Engineering Tools, Experimentation & Testing | PO 5: Engineering Practices for Society, Sustainability & Environment | PO 6: Project Management | PO 7: Life-long Learning |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------ | ------------------------ |
| **Competency**: Use concepts of management optimally to establish a small enterprise or start-up, validate it and make it scalable |                                             |                        |                                      |                                                    |                                                              |                          |                          |
| CO1: Understanding the dynamic role of entrepreneurship and Startups by Acquiring Entrepreneurial spirit and resourcefulness, quality, competency | 3                                           | 1                      | 2                                    | -                                                  | -                                                            | 2                        | 2                        |
| CO2: Identify a Business Idea and implement it               | 3                                           | 2                      | 2                                    | 1                                                  | 1                                                            | 3                        | 3                        |
| CO3: Select suitable Management practices like leadership and Ownership, resource institutes | 3                                           | -                      | 1                                    | 1                                                  | 2                                                            | 2                        | 3                        |
| CO4: Overview of Support Agencies and Incubators             | 2                                           | 3                      | 2                                    | 2                                                  | 1                                                            | 2                        | 2                        |
| CO5: Building Project Proposal & knowing CSR, Ethics, Ex-Im, & Exit strategies | 3                                           | 2                      | 2                                    | 1                                                  | 1                                                            | 3                        | 3                        |

**Legend:** '3' for high, '2' for medium, '1' for low and '-' for no correlation of each CO with PO.

## 16. COURSE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

## GTU Resource Persons

| S. No. | Name and Designation    | Institute     | Contact No. | Email                                           |
| ------ | ----------------------- | ------------- | ----------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| 1      | Mr. Ujjval V Buch (MBA) | G.P.Ahmedabad | 9825346922  | [uvbuch@gmail.com](mailto:uvbuch@gmail.com)     |
| 2      | Dr. Satya Acharya       | EDI, Bhat.    | 7600050606  | [satya@ediindia.org](mailto:satya@ediindia.org) |
