**Program Name:** Engineering

---

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI03016051
Course / Subject Name : Object Oriented Programming with JAVA

**Academic Year:** 2024-25

Semester:                         3rd

Category of the Course:           PCC

Basic computer skills and an understanding of coding concepts.
Prerequisite:
Java is a versatile, general-purpose programming language that is open-source,
platform-independent, class-based, and object-oriented, featuring an extensive
library ecosystem. It is widely recognized for its simplicity, portability,
reliability, and is designed to be robust, secure, dynamic, and architecture-neutral.
The "write once, run anywhere" principle allows Java code to run on any
Rationale:       platform that supports Java without needing to be recompiled. With strong
industry support, Java is essential for many technologies such as Java Server
Pages (JSP) and Android app development. This course equips students with the
essential skills needed to develop object-oriented applications in Java and will
enable them to solve real-world programming challenges.

Course Outcome:

After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
No                               Course Outcomes                        RBT Level
- 1   Understand Object-Oriented Programming paradigm with java.         Understand
- 2   Understand building blocks of OOPs language.                       Understand
Implement exception handling and multithreading in object oriented
- 3                                                                      Apply
programs.
- 4 Develop an object oriented program to handle files.                  Apply
- Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
Teaching and Examination Scheme:

                                    Total
        Teaching Scheme
                                   Credits               Assessment Pattern and Marks
           (in Hours)
                                 L+T+ (PR/2)                                                      Total
                                                         Theory          Tutorial / Practical     Marks
- T       PR            C           ESE                                  ESE
- A(M)         PA(I)
- E)                                  (V)
- 0        2               4         70         30            20          30        150

        w.e.f. 2024-25                         http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/               Page No. 1 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
                                        Program Name: Engineering
                                               Level: Diploma
                                      Branch: Information Technology
                                     Course / Subject Code : DI03016051
```

Course / Subject Name : Object Oriented Programming with JAVA
Course Content:
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
 Unit                                                                          No. of       % of
 No.                                                                           Hours      Weightage
         Introduction to Object Oriented Programming paradigm and
- AVA

            1.1Introduction to Programming paradigm, types of
               programming paradigm, Procedure-Oriented vs. Object-
               Oriented Programming, Features of Object-Oriented
               Programming:- encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism,
               abstraction, etc. , Benefits of OOP, Applications of OOP.
  1.                                                                             8            15
           1.2 Basics of Java:- Background/History of Java, Java Features,
- DK, JRE, JVM, and Byte code, Java Environment Setup,
               and Java program structure.
           1.3 Basic Language Elements:- Comments, data types,
               variables, scope and lifetime of variables, operators, type
               conversion and casting, Control Statements: Conditional and
               Looping Statement, Command line argument, and Java
               Memory Management.
         Fundamentals of Object Oriented Programming
```

2.1  Objects, Classes and Methods, Passing and Returning object
from Method, Method overloading.
2. 2.2 Access modifiers, ‘this’ keyword, ‘static’ keyword.              8            15
2.3 Constructors,      Default     constructors,   Parameterized
constructors, Copy constructors, Private constructor, and
Constructor Overloading.
2.4 String class, String Buffer class, Wrapper Class.
Inheritance, Interface and Packages.

3.1   Inheritance with its type, Method overriding, ‘super’ and
‘final’ keywords, Object class.
3.2   Polymorphism, Types of Polymorphism, method
overloading vs. method overriding, Dynamic method
3. dispatch.                                                     13            30
3.3   Abstraction, Abstract classes vs. Interfaces, implementing
interfaces, extending interfaces, default method.
3.4   Package, setting a CLASSPATH, adding class and
interfaces to a package, importing package, static import,
access modifier and class hiding rules in a package.

w.e.f. 2024-25                       http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/              Page No. 2 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI03016051
Course / Subject Name : Object Oriented Programming with JAVA
Exception Handling & Multithreaded Programming

4.1  Basic of Exception and Errors, Types of Exception, try and
catch in Exception, multiple catch clauses, nested try
4. statements, throw and throws keywords, finally clause.             10            25
4.2 Basics of Multithreading, The Java thread model and main
thread, Life cycle of a thread, Creation of thread by
extending Thread class, implementing Runnable interface,
Thread priorities.
File handling in Java

5.1   Introduction to Stream, types of Stream, Stream classes and
5. its hierarchy, I/O classes: File Class, File Input Stream, File   6             15
Output Stream, Input Stream Reader, Output Stream Writer,
File Reader, File Writer, Buffered Reader.
5.2   Reading and writing ‘text’ and ‘.csv’ files.
Total                                      45           100

Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
                                Distribution of Theory Marks (in %)
- | R Level | U Level | A Level | N Level | E Level | C Level |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
- 6               40           34               -                -               -
 Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create (as
 per Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)

References/Suggested Learning Resources:

 (a) Books:
   S.
               Title of Book                Author            Publication with place, year and ISBN
  No.
        Java: The Complete             Herbert Schildt       McGraw-Hill Education, 11th Edition
- Reference                                            ISBN-13 2120440121-879 :
- Mcgraw Hill Education, 5th Edition
- Programming with Java          Balagurusamy E.
- SBN-13:978-93-5134-320-2
        Java 8 Programming             DT Editorial          Dreamtech Press,New Delhi,
- Services
        Black Book                                           ISBN:978-93-5119-758-4

```

(b) Open source software and website:
1. Java Development Kit:
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html
2. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/index.html

w.e.f. 2024-25                           http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/              Page No. 3 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI03016051
Course / Subject Name : Object Oriented Programming with JAVA
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105191
4. https://cse.iitkgp.ac.in/~dsamanta/java/index.htm
5. https://www.javatpoint.com/java-tutorial
6. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/java/index.htm
7. https://www.programiz.com/java-programming
8. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/java/

Suggested Course Practical List:

## Practical Outcomes

```
 The following practical outcomes (PrOs) are the subcomponents of the COs. These PrOs need to be
 attained to achieve the COs.

                                                                                               Approx.
 Sr.                                                                                    Unit
                                Practical Outcomes (PrOs)                                        Hrs.
 No.                                                                                    No.
                                                                                               required

        A) Install JDK and Setup a Java Programming development environment by
           using:
```

1. Command Prompt (SET PATH command and using Environment
- Variable).                                                               I        2
2. Any open source IDE (Eclipse, Jcreater etc)
B) Test the java development environment setup by implementing a simple
java program (print : “OOP with JAVA”).

Develop programs to demonstrate use of –
1. if statement and its different form.
- 2. switch case statement.                                                      I        2
3. for loop.
4. ‘while’ and ‘do while’ loop.

Develop a Java program to find maximum and minimum numbers from
- I        2
array elements.

A) Develop an Object Oriented Program that simulates real-world entities
using classes and objects. (For example, develop a banking application,
4        model a college system, or represent any other real-world concept             II       2
through the use of classes and objects.)
B) Develop a program that demonstrates method overloading.

A) Develop a program that shows uses of different functions of String class.
B) Develop a program that shows uses of Wrapper Class to convert
- II       2
primitive value into object(Boxing) and object into primitive value(Un-
boxing).

A) Develop a programs to demonstrate use of ‘static’ and ‘this’ keywords.
- B) Develop a program with an overloaded constructor. Also develop the            II       2
copy constructor to create a new object with the state of the existing

w.e.f. 2024-25                         http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/               Page No. 4 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI03016051
Course / Subject Name : Object Oriented Programming with JAVA

object.

Develop a program to demonstrate single level inheritance, multilevel
- III      2
inheritance, and hierarchical inheritance.

Develop a program with one class named shape which has two member
functions named erase () and draw(). In the program we have three other
- III      2
subclasses: circle, triangle and square. Override methods of the superclass
into subclasses.

Develop a java program that illustrates interface inheritance. Interface ‘A1’
and ‘A2’ are extended from interface ‘A’. Interface ‘A12’ inherited from
9        both ‘A1’ and ‘A2’. Each interface declares one method and one constant.          III      2
Class ‘Interface_Imple’ implements ‘A12’. Instantiate ‘Interface_Imple’ and
invoke each of its methods. Each method displays one of the constants.

Develop a program to create a Package and demonstrate how packages are
- 0        used in java. And use java access modifier to demonstrate the access rules in     III      2
a package.

- 1       Develop a program to demonstrate the use of ‘super’ and ‘final’ keywords.          III      2

A) Develop a program to handle multiple exceptions using multiple catch
blocks.
- 2                                                                                          IV       2
B) Develop a program to demonstrate use of throw, throws, and finally
keyword.

Develop a program that executes two threads. One thread will print the even
- 3       numbers and the another thread will print odd numbers between 1 to                 IV       2
- 0.(Create the thread by implementing runnable interface)

- 4       Develop programs to create, write, modify, read operations on Text files.          V        2

- 5       Develop programs to create, write, modify, read operations on .CSV files.          V        2

Note:-
More Practical Exercises can be designed and offered by the respective course teacher to develop
the industry relevant skills/outcomes to match the COs. The above table is only a suggestive list.

List of Laboratory/Learning Resources Required:
Sr. No. Laboratory/Learning Resources/Equipment Name with Broad Specifications PrO. No.

Computer with latest configuration with Windows/Linux/Unix Operating System,
- All
- DK (Java Development Kit) Version 8 or above

- Open Source Text Editors or IDE                                                         All

w.e.f. 2024-25                         http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                Page No. 5 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI03016051
Course / Subject Name : Object Oriented Programming with JAVA
Suggested Project List:

A suggestive list of projects/case study is given here. This has to match the COs. Similar projects
could be assigned to students by the concerned course teacher:

Case Study 1: Develop a Banking management application that provides following services to
customers.
1. Customers can view their account details such as type of account, available balance etc.
2. He/she can perform transactions (i. e. Cash Deposit and Withdraw).
Case Study 2: Develop a simple college management application that provides following
services.
1. Stores Details of college, departments, and students (use inheritance to define class
hierarchy).
2. Shows exam results of Students (Result of Individual student, %pass, %fail, top-3
students, etc).
Case Study 3: Develop a library book issue management system.

Suggested Activities for Students:

Other than the classroom and laboratory learning, following are the suggested student- related co-
curricular activities which can be undertaken to accelerate the attainment of the various outcomes
in this course: Students should perform following activities in group and prepare reports of about 5
pages for each activity.
- Prepare a document which differentiates Java versions.
- Undertake projects in teams
- Give a seminar on any relevant topics.
- Undertake a market survey of different JAVA APIs.

*******

w.e.f. 2024-25                          http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/             Page No. 6 of 6
