**Program Name:** Diploma in Engineering

---

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics & Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code: DI02011011
Course / Subject Name: Electronics Circuit and Application (ECA)

**Academic Year:** 2024-25
Semester:                         2nd
Category of the Course:           PCC

Prerequisite:   Basic knowledge of R, L, C, Diode, Transistor
Rationale:      Electrical, Electronic, Instrumentation and allied engineering diploma holders are
required to use and maintain various types of electronically controlled equipment. The
fundamental principles of electronics are to be applied in most of the situations to
arrive at the probable solutions which is faced in the world of work, therefore the
knowledge of the functions of various basic electronic devices and components and
practical skills acquired through the laboratory experiments will help them, when they
work with electronic equipment and its sub-circuits. This course is designed to
develop the skills to use the basics electronic components and apply the knowledge to
maintain the various types of electronic circuits.

Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
- BT Level
No                                   Course Outcomes

Explain the construction, operation, and characteristics of JFET and MOSFET,           R, U,
and analyze their applications in electronic circuits.                                A,N,E,C
Compare different biasing methods for amplifiers, and evaluate the impact of           R, U,
thermal stability techniques on circuit performance.                                  A,N,E,C
Analyze the frequency response of single and multi-stage amplifiers, considering       R, U,
gain, bandwidth, and coupling techniques.                                             A,N,E,C
Assess the effects of negative feedback on amplifier parameters, including gain,       R, U,
impedance, stability, and distortion.                                                 A,N,E,C
Demonstrate the design and operation of various oscillators, such as RC, LC, and       R, U,
crystal oscillators, and explain the use of UJT in relaxation oscillators.            A,N,E,C
- Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)

w.e.f. 2024-25                            http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                  Page 1 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics & Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code: DI02011011
Course / Subject Name: Electronics Circuit and Application (ECA)
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
                               Total
      Teaching Scheme         Credits
                                                         Assessment Pattern and Marks
         (in Hours)           L+T+
- PR/2)                                                                Total
                                                         Theory           Tutorial / Practical
- T         PR            C          ESE    PA / CA
- A/CA (I)    ESE (V)
- E)      (M)
- 0         2            4           70       30             20            30         150

Course Content:
- Unit                                                                                 No. of  % of
 No.                                                                                  Hours Weightage
           Field Effect Transistors(FETs)

           1.1 Junction field effect transistor(JFET) structure, symbol, working,
           characteristics, parameters
```

1.2 Metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor(MOSFET):
- 1.3 Depletion type MOSFET. structure, symbol, working,                      10          25%
characteristics.
1.4 Enhancement type MOSFET.
structure, symbol, working, characteristics
1.5 Comparison of BJT, JFET, MOSFET
1.6 List application of FETs
Transistor Biasing circuits And Thermal stability

1.1 Biasing of Amplifier and Definition of Operating Point
1.2 The Load Lines: D.C. Load Line and A.C. Load Line.
2. 1.3 Biasing Methods.                                                        9           20%
1.4 Stability Factor: Definition and features.
1.5 Compensation techniques for bias stability.
1.6 Thermal Runaway, Thermal Resistance & Thermal Stability.
1.7 Heat Sink and its types.
Frequency Response of Transistor Amplifier
3.                                                                                     7         15%
3.1Amplifier Parameters Gain, Bandwidth and Gain Bandwidth
product.

w.e.f. 2024-25                                http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                    Page 2 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics & Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code: DI02011011
Course / Subject Name: Electronics Circuit and Application (ECA)
3.2Effect of Emitter Bypass Capacitor and Coupling Capacitor on
frequency response.
3.3Frequency Response of Single Stage Amplifier.
3.4 Gain of multi-stage amplifier.
3.5Different Coupling Techniques for cascading: Direct, RC, LC and
Transformer.
3.6Frequency Response of Two Stage RC Coupled amplifier.

Feedback in amplifiers

4.1 Concept of feedback in amplifiers: Negative and Positive
4.2 Types of feedback
4.3 Voltage gain of feedback amplifier.
4.                                                                                   9    20%
4.4 Describe the effect of negative feedback on amplifier parameters
like Gain, input impedance, output impedance, stability,
bandwidth, frequency response, distortion, and noise
4.4 List the advantages and disadvantages of negative feedback.
4.5 Emitter follower circuit
Oscillators.

5.1 Use of positive feedback in oscillators.
5.2 Barkhausen’s criteria for oscillation
5.3 Overall gain of positive feedback amplifier.
5.4 Tank circuit
5.5 Different types of oscillators.
5.6 LC oscillators
- 1) Hartley oscillator.
5.                                                                                   10   20%
- 2) Colpitts oscillator
5.7 RC oscillators
- 1) Phase shift oscillator
- 2) Wein bridge oscillator
5.8 Crystal Oscillator
Piezoelectric effect, characteristics of crystal, crystal oscillator circuits
5.9 Uni junction transistor(UJT)
Structure, symbol, working, characteristics.
5.10 Use of UJT as relaxation oscillator
Total                                        45    100%

w.e.f. 2024-25                                 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                Page 3 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics & Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code: DI02011011
Course / Subject Name: Electronics Circuit and Application (ECA)
Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
                             Distribution of Theory Marks (in %)
- | R Level | U Level | A Level | N Level | E Level | C Level |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
- 5             40             35
Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create (as per
Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)

References/Suggested Learning Resources:
(a) Books:
```

1. Basic Electronics and linear circuits. By N.N.Bhargava, D.C.Kulshreshtha, S.C. Gupta .McGraw
Hill Publication.
2. Electronic Principles. By Malvino A. P. MGH, Latest edition.
3. Principles of Electronics.By V.K.Metha, Rohit Mehta. S. Chand.
4. Electronic Devices and Circuit: An Introduction Mottershead Allen Goodyear Publishing Co.

(b) Open source software and website:

1. https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLwjK_iyK4LLBVM18VZ7JKW-
- 88FAtnr8_&si=Rcg5IZlRmTYXR-c8
2. www.nptel.iitm.ac.in
3. www .electronics-tutorials.ws
4. https://lectures.gtu.ac.in/listview.aspx?br=11&course=DI

Suggested Course Practical List:
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
 Sr.                                                                          Unit   Approx.
 No.                       Practical Outcomes (PrOs)                          No.      Hrs.
                                                                                     Required.
- JFET Characteristics                                                   I       02
- MOSFET Characteristics                                                 I       02
- Build and test voltage divider biased type amplifier and measure      II       02
          voltage at different points on the circuit and observe waveforms.
- Test thermal stability of fixed biased type amplifier.                II       02
- Obtain frequency response of single stage transistor amplifier.      III       02
- Obtain frequency response of two stage RC-coupled amplifier.         III       02
- Test the performance of negative feedback amplifier and              IV        02
          compare gain, BW with amplifier without feedback.

      w.e.f. 2024-25                             http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/              Page 4 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
                                   Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
                                               Level: Diploma
                                  Branch: Electronics & Communication Engineering
                                     Course / Subject Code: DI02011011
                           Course / Subject Name: Electronics Circuit and Application (ECA)
```

- Emitter follower circuit                                              IV             02
- Build / test Colpitts oscillator for variable frequency.               V             02
- 0         Build / test Hartley oscillator for variable frequency.                V             02
- 1         Phase shift oscillator                                                 V             02
- 2         Wein bridge oscillator                                                 V             02
- 3         Build / test UJT as a Relaxation Oscillator.                           V             02
- 4         Mini/Micro project                                                   I to V          02
- 5         Mini/Micro project                                                   I to V          02

List of Laboratory/Learning Resources Required:
Sr. No.     Equipment Name with Broad Specifications                             PrO. No.
- Dual variable DC power supply, 0- 30V, 2A, With Short                         All
circuit protection, separate display for voltage and current.
- Cathode Ray Oscilloscope, Dual Trace 20 MHz, 1MΩ                               All
Input Impedance.
- Function Generator 0-2 MHz with Sine, square and                              5-6
triangular output with variable frequency and amplitude.
- Digital Multimeters                                                           All
Suggested Project List:
A suggestive list of micro-projects is given here. This has to match the competency and the COs.
Similar micro-projects could be added by the concerned course teacher:
1. FET/MOSFET Application: Build any application based on FET/MOSFET and prepare a
mini project report.
2. Transistor Amplifier: a common emitter amplifier using transistor and prepare a mini
3. Emitter follower circuit/Any amplifier with negative feedback.
4. Oscillators. Build and test any oscillator circuit.
5. UJT application. Build any application based on UJT and test it.

w.e.f. 2024-25                                http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                   Page 5 of 6
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Electronics & Communication Engineering
Course / Subject Code: DI02011011
Course / Subject Name: Electronics Circuit and Application (ECA)
Suggested Activities for Students: If any
Other than the classroom and laboratory learning, the following are the suggested student-related co-
curricular activities that can be undertaken to accelerate the attainment of the various outcomes in this
course: Students should perform the following activities in group and prepare reports of about 5 pages
for each activity. They should also collect/record physical evidence for their (student’s) portfolio which
may be useful for their placement interviews:

- Prepare a table and interpret the technical specification of various BJT/FET/MOSFET using data
sheet.
- Collect information and seminar on any relevant topic related with the course.
- Undertake a market survey of different semiconductor components, amplifiers, function generators.
- Identify various types of transistor
e.) Analysis of different oscillator circuits
f.) Maintaining/Repairing of kits and equipments in department.

*********

w.e.f. 2024-25                               http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                  Page 6 of 6
