**Program Name:** Diploma in Engineering

---

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI02016021
Course / Subject Name : Fundamentals of Software Development

**Academic Year:** 2024-2025

Semester:                         2nd

Category of the Course:           ESC

Prerequisite:     Basic Computer Knowledge including logical reasoning and decision-making
skills.
Rationale:        One of the important products in the field of Information Technology is a
Software. The software has changed every aspect of our life and made available
everything of our finger tips. It has revolutionized every area of human life like
education, health, defense and security, finance and business, travel, social life,
politics, entertainment and so on. Thus, a software increases the responsibilities
for the developer. The software development process in the industry is also
changing rapidly.
This course guides the students to analyze, design, implement and test the
software product with proper documentation during the courses in higher
semesters of diploma program. At the end of the course, the student will develop
adequate skills of documentation and will understand the application of concepts
in software development.

Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
- BT Level
No                                      Course Outcomes

- 1    Explain software development activities.                                             Understand

- 2    Select appropriate software process model for software project development.            Apply

Prepare software requirement specification (SRS) document for a software               Apply
project.
- 4    Organize software project development schedule.                                        Apply

- 5    Prepare a design of the software with user interface.                                  Apply

- 6   Apply testing on software product with proper test cases.                               Apply
- Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)

w.e.f. 2024-25                            http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/               Page 1 of 5
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI02016021
Course / Subject Name : Fundamentals of Software Development

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching Scheme    Total Credits
                                              Assessment Pattern and Marks
   (in Hours)      L+T+ (PR/2)                                                              Total
                                            Theory                Tutorial / Practical      Marks
- T     PR          C
- SE (E)     PA / CA (M)      PA/CA (I)      ESE (V)
- 0      0          3             70            30             00            00         100

Course Content:
Unit                                                                             No. of  % of
       Content                                                                   Hours Weightage
       Introduction Software Development Process
       1.1 Software – definition, characteristics
       1.2 Characteristics of Web-based application
 1.                                                                                03       06
       1.3 Software engineering – A layered technology
       1.4 Software Myths
       1.5 Software Process framework and umbrella activities
       Software Life cycle models
```

2.1 Select Software process model for project development
- Waterfall model
- Incremental Model
- Prototyping Model
2.                                                                                10       23
- Spiral Model
- Rapid Application Development (RAD)
2.2 Agile Development
- Agile Process & Principles
- Comparison of Agile development with traditional models
Software Requirement Analysis
3.1 Identify software requirements
- Requirement gathering – collect requirements from stakeholders
- Analyze the requirements
3. 3.2 Prepare Software Requirement Specifications (SRS)                       8        17
- Importance of SRS
- Users of SRS
- Characteristics of good & bad SRS
3.3 Types of Requirements in SRS

w.e.f. 2024-25                      http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                Page 2 of 5
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI02016021
Course / Subject Name : Fundamentals of Software Development

- Functional Requirements
- Non-functional Requirements
Software Project Management
4.1 Responsibility of software project Manager
- Job responsibility
- Necessary skill to manage software projects
4.2 Scheduling
- Work breakdown structure
4. ● Activity network and critical path Method                    8        17
- PERT chart
- Gantt chart
4.3 Risk Management
- Risk Identification: Project, Technical, Business
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Mitigation
Software Design
5.1 Software design process
- Design activities
- Design methodologies
5.2 Introduction of Cohesion
5.3 Introduction of Coupling
5.4 Data Flow Diagram (DFD) Model
5. ● Primitive Symbols of DFD                                    10        23
- Levels of DFD
- Design DFD Model of System
- Shortcomings of DFD Model
5.5 Introduction of Data dictionary
5.6 User Interface design
- Characteristics of good UI
- Types of UI: command-based, menu-based
Software Testing
6.1 Introduction of Testing
6.                                                                        06        14
6.2 Test cases and test suit
6.3 Introduction to Verification and Validation

w.e.f. 2024-25                      http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/        Page 3 of 5
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI02016021
Course / Subject Name : Fundamentals of Software Development

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
       6.4   Unit testing
       6.5   Black-box testing
       6.6   White-box testing
                                         Total                                     45        100

Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
- Distribution of Theory Marks
- | R Level | U Level | A Level | N Level | E Level | C Level |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
- 6              28            26             -               -                -
Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create
(as per Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)

References/Suggested Learning Resources:
(a) Books:
Sr.   Title of Book                   Author                  Publication with place, year and
No.                                                           ISBN

- Software Engineering: A         Roger S. Pressman       Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi
      Practitioner's Approach                                 978-9353165710

- Fundamentals of Software        Rajib Mall              PHI Learning Private Limited, New
```

Engineering                                             Delhi
- 78-9388028028

- Software Engineering            Ian Sommerville         Pearson Education, India
- 78-9332582699

- Object - Oriented Modeling      Michael Blaha,          Pearson Education, India
and Design With UML, 2e         James Rumbaugh          978-8131711064

(b) Open-source software and website:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106101061/
2. https://www.mhhe.com/engcs/compsci/pressman/student/olc/cases.mhtml
3. http://www.foreui.com/ (for User interface)
4. https://www.smartdraw.com/ (for all types of diagrams)

Suggested Project List:

w.e.f. 2024-25                        http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/               Page 4 of 5
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: Information Technology
Course / Subject Code : DI02016021
Course / Subject Name : Fundamentals of Software Development

The project could be industry application based, internet-based, workshop-based, laboratory-based
or field-based. Each project should encompass two or more COs which are in fact, an integration of
- Os and ADOs. Each student will have to maintain a dated work diary consisting of individual
contributions in the project work and give a seminar presentation of it before submission. The total
duration of the project should not be less than 16 (sixteen) student engagement hours during the
course. The student ought to submit a project by the end of the semester to develop the industry-
oriented COs.
A suggestive list of projects is given here. This has to match the competency and the COs. Similar
projects could be added by the concerned course teacher:
1) Study the SRS document of project from any software company and enlist functional as
well as non-functional requirements.
2) Prepare the user interface using online tools of the known system.
3) Design DFD (context, level-1/2) and data dictionary of the selected Project.
4) Search any automated test case generator and prepare test suits for the system.
Suggested Activities for Students:
Other than the classroom learning, following are the suggested student-related co-curricular
activities which can be undertaken to accelerate the attainment of the various outcomes in this
course: Students should conduct following activities in group and prepare reports of about 5 pages
for each activity, also collect/record physical evidences for their (student’s) portfolio which will be
useful for their placement interviews:
- Give a seminar on any relevant topics.
- Suggest a small existing software/website to students and discuss on betterment of its
user-interface design.
- Visit a software company and observe their documents and discuss their practices
adopted for software development.
- Prepare SRS documents based on Case studies.

*******

w.e.f. 2024-25                           http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                  Page 5 of 5
