**Program Name:** Diploma in Engineering

---

# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000061
Course / Subject Name : Indian Constitution

**Academic Year:** 2024-25
Semester:                            2nd
Category of the Course:              MNC- AU

Prerequisite:     -
Rationale:            This course will survey the basic structure and operative dimensions of Indian
Constitution. It will explore various aspects of the Indian political and legal
system from a historical perspective highlighting the various events that led to
the making of the Indian Constitution. It will also socio-political equations. The
various challenges faced by the constitution and the corresponding coping
mechanisms would also be discussed. Broadly, the students would be exposed
to the working of various institutions, offices and political debates ensuing from
the operation of the Indian constitution in the last five decades.

Competency
The purpose of this course is to help the student to attain the following industry identified
competency through various teaching learning experiences:
- Follow policies, processes, duties, rights and federal structure of Indianconstitution
as responsible citizens and engineer of the country.

Course Outcome:
The practical exercises, the underpinning knowledge and the relevant soft skills associated with
the identified competency are to be developed in the student for the achievement of the following
- Os:
- List salient features and characteristics of the constitution of India.
- Follow fundamental responsibilities, privileges, rights and duties as responsible
citizen and engineer of the country.
- Differentiate between state and central administrative setup of the country.
- Explain major constitutional amendment procedures and emergency provisions in the
- Explain judicial setup and electoral process of the country.

w.e.f. 2024-25                                  http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                    Page 1 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000061
Course / Subject Name : Indian Constitution

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
                                    Total
         Teaching Scheme
                                   Credits           Assessment Pattern and Marks
            (in Hours)
                                 L+T+ (PR/2)                                                 Total
                                                     Theory         Tutorial / Practical     Marks
- T         PR        C           ESE    PA / CA
- A/CA (I)    ESE (V)
- E)      (M)
- 0         0          0           0         0           50          0          50

Suggested Practical Exercises - Not applicable

Major Equipment/ Instruments Required-Not Applicable

Affective Domain Outcomes
  The following sample Affective Domain Outcomes (ADOs) are embedded in many of the above
  mentioned COs and PrOs. More could be added to fulfil the development of this course t
  competency.
- Work as a leader/a team member.
```

- Follow constitutional duties and responsibilities
- Follow ethical practices.
- Practice environmental friendly methods and processes.
The ADOs are best developed through the laboratory/field based exercises. Moreover, the level of
achievement of the ADOs according to Krathwohl’s ‘Affective Domain Taxonomy’ should
gradually increase as planned below:
‘Valuing Level’ in 1st year
ii. ‘Organization Level’ in 2nd year.
iii. ‘Characterization Level’ in 3rd year.

Underpinning Theory
The major underpinning theory is given below based on the higher level UOs of Revised Bloom’s
taxonomy that are formulated for development of the COs and competency. If required, more such
higher level UOs could be included by the course teacher
to focus on attainment of COs and competency.

w.e.f. 2024-25                            http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                    Page 2 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000061
Course / Subject Name : Indian Constitution

### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
                       Unit Outcomes (UOs)
      Unit                                                                Topics and Sub-topics
- 4 to 6 UOs at different levels)

                                                         1.1 Meaning of the constitution of India
                  1a.    Explain      the    meaning     1.2 Historical perspective of the
   Unit – I         ofpreamble of the constitution.          Constitution of India
 Constitution       1b. List the salient features of
                              constitution.              1.3 Salient features and characteristicsof
                 1c. List the characteristics of             the Constitution of India
  Preamble                                               1.4 Preamble to the Constitution of

                 2a. Enlist the fundamental rights.
                 2b.Identify fundamental duties.
                                                       2.1 Fundamental Rights under Part-III
  Unit – II      2c. Follow fundamental
- Details of exercise of rights and
Fundamental           responsibilities as an engineer.
```

Limitations)
2d. Differentiate            between
Rights and                                            2.2   Fundamental duties and their
fundamental rights and directive
Directive        principles.                         significance
Principles      2e. Identify fundamental duties and 2.3 Relevance of Directive Principles of
responsibilities applicable to a State Policy under part-IV.
practicing engineer.

3.1 Federal structure and distribution of
legislative and financial powers between
the Union and the States
3a. Draw the structure of               3.2 Union Executive-President, Prime
governance in India.                      minister, Parliament and the Supreme
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

```
 Unit–     III                                               Court of India,
 Federal         3b. Differentiate between state and
 Structure                                               3.3 State Executive - Governor, Chief
                 central administrative setup of the         Minister, State Legislator, and high
                               country.                      Court
                                                         3.4 Local Administration - District
                                                             Administration, Municipal
                                                             Corporation, Zila Panchayat

w.e.f. 2024-25                               http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                  Page 3 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
                                   Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
                                               Level: Diploma
                                               Branch: All
                                     Course / Subject Code : DI02000061
                                 Course / Subject Name : Indian Constitution

```

4.1 Amendment of the Constitutional
### Teaching and Examination Scheme

 Unit– IV        4a. Enlist the constitutional                Powers and Procedure
Governance                 amendments                     4.2 Major Constitutional Amendment
   and           4b. Infer the purposes of various            procedure - 42nd, 44th, 74th, 76th, 86th
Amendment s                   amendments.                     and 91st.
                                                          4.3Emergency provisions
              5a. Perform judicial review for
  Unit– V               societal welfare
   Judicial   5b. Abide by the judicial provisions.
   System     5c. Adopt the electoral procedures          5.1 The Indian Judicial System
 and Election       With respect to citizenship.          5.2 Judicial Review
 Commission   5d. Abide  by greening laws                 5.3 Election Commission
on & National 5e. Identify the topics/subtopics in a      5.4 National Green Tribunal
    Green          given engineering course where
  Tribunal           greening laws are affecting
                             significantly.

Suggested Specification Table for Question Paper Design

                                                                      Distribution of Theory Marks
 Unit                    Unit Title                    Teaching
 No.                                                    Hours        R        U         A          Total
```

Level    Level     Level       Marks
- Constitution and Preamble                          04        04       04         0           08
Fundamental Rights and Directive
- I                                                      08        03        02        10           15
Principles
- II   Federal Structure                                  07         02       03        06           11
- V    Governance and Amendments                          05        02        02        04           08
Judicial  System         and     Election
- 04        02        02        04           08
Commission
Total                              28        13        13        24           50
- Legends: R=Remember, U=Understand, A=Apply and above (Revised Bloom’s taxonomy)*

Note: This specification table provides general guidelines to assist student for their learning and
to teachers to teach and question paper designers/setters to formulate test items/questions to assess

w.e.f. 2024-25                              http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                        Page 4 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000061
Course / Subject Name : Indian Constitution

the attainment of the UOs. The actual distribution of marks at different taxonomy levels (of R, U
and A) in the question paper may vary slightly from above table.

Suggested Student Activities
Other than the classroom and laboratory learning, following are the suggested student- related co-
curricular activities which can be undertaken to accelerate the attainment of the various outcomes
in this course. Students should conduct following activities in group and prepare reports of about 5
pages for each activity. They also collect/record physical evidences for their (student’s) portfolio
which will be useful for their placement interviews:
- Prepare a report on Mock court hearing
- Visit to courts
- Arrange Mock Parliament.
- Visit to Local Bodies
- Visit to Courts.
- Visit to Legal Service Authority
- Design games and simulation
- Group discussions on current print articles
- Prepare college/posters on current constitutional issues.
- Learning through cases
- A.K. Gopalan Case (1950):weblink https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1857950/
- Shankari Prasad Case (1951):weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/1706770/
- Berubari Union case (1960) :weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/1120103/
- Golaknath case (1967) :weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/120358/
- Kesavananda Bharati case(1973):weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/257876/
- Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain case
- 1975):weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/936707/
- Maneka Gandhi case (1978):weblink https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1766147/
- Minerva Mills case (1980): weblink https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1939993/
- Indra Sawhney and Union of India
- 1992):weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/1969682/
- Samatha         and   State    of     Andhra      Pradesh    (1997):     weblink
Aruna Shanbaug Case (2011) : weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/235821/
- Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) ... vs Union Of India And Ors.: Right ToPrivacy
- 2017)weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/1857950/
- L Chandra Kumar Case (1997):weblink https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1152518/
- Habeas Corpus Case (1976): weblink https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1735815/
w.e.f. 2024-25                              http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                   Page 5 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000061
Course / Subject Name : Indian Constitution

- Romesh Thapar Case (1950): weblink https://indiankanoon.org/doc/456839/
- M.C. Mehta And Anr vs Union of India &Ors on 20 December, 1986 Bhpal Gas
Tragedy:weblinkhttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/1486949/
- M.C. Mehta vs Union Of India &Ors on 30 December, 1996 Taj Mahal:weblink
https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1964392/
- M.C. Mehta vs Union Of India on 15 November, 2019 Delhi Pollution: weblink
ttps://indiankanoon.org/doc/174204561/
- Samit      Mehta     v.   Union    of    India    &    Ors.;National    Green
weblink:https://www.casemine.com/judgement/in/5b17d5604a932678010063da

Suggested Special Instructional Strategies (If Any)
These are sample strategies, which the teacher can use to accelerate the attainment of the various
outcomes in this course:
- Massive open online courses (MOOCs) may be used to teach various topics/sub topics.
- Guide student(s) in undertaking micro-projects.
- ‘L’ in section No. 4means different types of teaching methods that are to be employed by
teachers to develop the outcomes.
- About 20% of the topics/sub-topics which are relatively simpler or descriptive in nature is
to be given to the students for self-learning, but to be assessed using different assessment
methods.
- With respect to section No.10, teachers need to ensure to create opportunities and
provisions for co-curricular activities.
- Guide students on how to address issues on environment and sustainability.

Suggested Micro-Projects
- Not Applicable

Suggested Learning Resources

S.         Title of Book                Author           Publication with place, year and
No.                                                                      ISBN
- The Constitution of                P.M. Bakshi       Universal Law Publishing, New
India                                          Delhi 15th edition, 2018, ISBN:
- 386515105
- Introduction to Indian            D.D. Basu        Lexis Nexis Publisher, New Delhi,
Constitution                                       2015, ISBN:935143446X

w.e.f. 2024-25                              http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                   Page 6 of 7
# GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Diploma in Engineering
Level: Diploma
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : DI02000061
Course / Subject Name : Indian Constitution

- Introduction to             B. K. Sharma      PHI, New Delhi, 6th edition, 2011,
Constitution of India                                   ISBN:8120344197
- The Constitution of               B.L. Fadia         Sahitya Bhawan, Agra, 2017,
India                                              ISBN:8193413768
- Ethics and Politics of the     Rajeev Bhargava    Oxford University Press, New Delhi,
Indian Constitution                                  2008, ISBN:0198063555
- The Constitutional Law         Durga Das Basu                 LexisNexis
of India                                   Butterworths Wadhwa, Nagpur 978-
- 1-8038-426-4
- Indian Constitution              Avtar Singh      Central Law Publication, Prayagraj.
Uttar Pradesh 2019. 978-
- 386456861
- The Constitution of          NaushirwanJhabwala        C. Jamnadas&Company.
India                                        Ahmedabad. 2016.978-9789364572

Software/Learning Websites
- http://www.legislative.gov.in/constitution-of-india
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitution_of_India
- https://www.india.gov.in/my-government/constitution-india
- https://eci.gov.in/about/about-eci/the-setup-r1/
- https://www.toppr.com/guides/civics/the-indian-constitution/the-constitution-of-india
- https://main.sci.gov.in/constitution
- https://nios.ac.in/media/documents/srsec317newE/317EL8.pdf
- https://legalaffairs.gov.in/sites/default/files/chapter%203.pdf
- https://www.concourt.am/armenian/legal_resources/world_constitutions/constit/india/india--
e.htm
- https://constitutionnet.org/vl/item/basic-structure-indian-constitution

*******

w.e.f. 2024-25                              http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/                 Page 7 of 7
